Add podcast episode 004: Agents as Infrastructure (#390)
coreyja/coreyja.com: podcast/agents-as-infrastructure.md

---
title: "Agents as Infrastructure (The Two-Pillar Play)"
date: 2026-05-06
slug: agents-as-infrastructure
youtube_id: "6MAvzL7uIfk"
audio_url: "https://coreyja-fm.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/004/audio.mp3"
audio_length_bytes: 8285222
audio_duration: "00:17:15"
transcript_url: "https://coreyja-fm.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/004/transcript.srt"
---

Welcome back to coreyja.fm! This episode is all about one idea: agents are the next infrastructure wave, and the winners are going to be the companies that own *both* pillars — a real data moat **and** the agent infrastructure that runs on top of it. Either pillar alone makes you a strong player. Both is what makes you a 10x winner of this cycle.

## The Two Pillars

There are two moats forming in the agent space, and they map to two different kinds of advantage:

> - **The data pillar.** Proprietary corpora, domain trust, ground truth that you can't buy — only accumulate. This is what every incumbent with a real data set has been sitting on for the last two decades, and agents are the first technology that can really *use* it across structured and unstructured data at scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The data pillar.** This is what every incumbent with a real data set has been sitting on for the last two decades. Agents are the first technology that can really *use* it across structured and unstructured data at scale.
```

- **The agent infrastructure pillar.** The layers above the model: retrieval, memory, tool runtimes, evals, identity, audit. The plumbing that turns a model into a product.

Have one pillar and you're competitive. Have both and you can do things nobody outside your company can replicate.

## Why It'll Mirror the Cloud

> I think this is going to play out the same shape the cloud did. We'll get the AWS-style players — the ones that own the underlying infrastructure and let you plug in whatever you need to build an agent. AWS already has most of the pieces: EC2, ECS, containerization, isolation, GPUs. They're in a really good spot to be one of the long-term winners here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I think this is going to play out the same shape the cloud did. We'll get the AWS-style players; the ones that own the underlying infrastructure and let you plug in whatever you need to build an agent. AWS already has most of the pieces: EC2, ECS, containerization, isolation, GPUs. They're in a really good spot to be one of the long-term winners here, as are the other hyperscalars.
```

> We'll also see Heroku-style players — the high-end-of-the-stack folks where you just plug in and get an agent. Both ends of that spectrum will work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll also see Heroku-style players, the high-end-of-the-stack folks, where you just plug in and get an agent. Both ends of that spectrum will work.
```

> The squeezed middle? Generic agent frameworks with no infrastructure underneath and no real UX edge on top. That's the empty space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The squeezed middle? Generic agent frameworks with no infrastructure underneath and no real UX edge on top. I imagine this space being much more barren.
```

## Inference Is the New Compute Bill

> The vertical integration argument starts with cost. SaaS scaled gracefully because each incremental use was essentially free — you'd already paid for the database and the web servers, and another query was just slotting into existing capacity. LLM inference breaks that pattern. Every time you summarize something for a user, there's a real per-use cost — and when you're paying frontier-model API prices, you feel it fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vertical integration argument starts with cost. SaaS scaled gracefully because each incremental use was essentially free. You'd already paid for the database and the web servers, and another query was just slotting into existing capacity. LLM inference breaks that pattern. Every time you summarize something for a user, there's a real per-use cost. And when you're paying frontier-model API prices, you feel it fast.
```

> The companies that get back to "scaling like software did" will be the ones that own enough of the stack to run their own weights for the work that doesn't need a frontier model. With open-weight models getting genuinely good, you don't need to ditch closed-frontier models entirely — you mix and match. Foundation models for the user-facing reasoning where intelligence really matters; locally-run open-weight models for the background work like memory retrieval, summarization, and pre-fetching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The companies that get back to "scaling like software did" will be the ones that own enough of the stack to run their own weights for the work that doesn't need a frontier model. With open-weight models getting genuinely good, you don't need to ditch closed-frontier models entirely, you mix and match. Foundation models for the user-facing reasoning where intelligence really matters; locally-run open-weight models for the background work like memory retrieval, summarization, and pre-fetching.
```

Owning that layer means you stop paying someone else's margin on every single agent call.

## Quality and UX Compound

The cost story is the easy half. The harder, more interesting half is what vertical integration does for *quality*.

> When you own the data layer, citation gets better. Evaluation gets better — you can grade outputs against domain truth, not benchmark scores. Hallucination detection gets easier. Permissions and audit can flow end-to-end because identity is mapped through the whole stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you own the data layer, citation gets better. Evaluation gets better too. You can grade outputs against domain truth, not benchmark scores. Hallucination detection gets easier. Permissions and audit can flow end-to-end because identity is mapped through the whole stack.
```
